---
gap: 8
title: Basic auth runtime
description: A generic runtime for services secured by HTTP basic authentication.
author: mf (@mfranciszkiewicz)
status: Draft
type: Feature
---

## Abstract

A generic runtime for services secured by HTTP basic authentication, provided on the Golem Network. The services
in subject are exposed to the Internet via host's (provider's) operating system. 

The runtime is responsible for managing access to the forementioned services via corresponding `.htpasswd` 
files and for gathering API usage statistics, i.e. the number of API calls that an authenticated user made to a service.

The first iteration of the runtime will only support the `nginx` reverse-proxy server.

## Motivation

The original runtime specification has been derived from the results of work on the Erigon and Lighthouse service 
runtimes. It was concluded that this kind of runtime could be useful in case of a multitude of REST-based services,
which do not enforce their own security mechanism.

## Specification

The following is a reviewed version of the [original specification](https://www.notion.so/golemnetwork/Basic-auth-runtime-specification-59b6d111e4de4426ac230e729222c91a):

- Provider should be able to add/remove services by adding/removing config files from some designated directory
    - designated directory lookup order:
      - `~/.local/share/ya-runtime-basic-auth`
      - current working directory
- The runtime should control access to services by HTTP basic auth.
    - There should be a separate access list for every service.
    - Requestor should be able to pass in the access credentials (user name + password) – these should **not** be generated by the runtime. User name collision should be handled.
    - Each activity is limited to a single pair of access credentials.
- Runtime should expose number of requests as a custom usage metric.
    - Breakdown of requests count into particular service endpoints (i.e. URL paths) is a nice to have feature.
- Supported HTTP servers: `nginx` (open source)


### Request counter implementation

The web server needs to be configured with a log format containing the authenticated user's name and the requested url. 
The log file will be monitored and parsed for the purpose of gathering statistics.

`nginx` example:

```
log_format main '[$time_local] [$remote_user] [$remote_addr] '
'"$request_method $scheme://$host$request_uri $server_protocol" '
'$status $body_bytes_sent "$http_referer" '
'"$http_user_agent" $request_time';
```

[var reference](https://nginx.org/en/docs/varindex.html)

[log-specific var reference](https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_log_module.html#log_format)

### Runtime implementation

Base the implementation on [ya-runtime-sdk](https://github.com/golemfactory/ya-runtime-sdk)
- use [ya-runtime-basic-auth](https://github.com/golemfactory/yagna-service-erigon/tree/master/ya-runtime-basic-auth) as a starting point
    - refer to [this comment](https://github.com/golemfactory/yagna-service-erigon/pull/47#issuecomment-983924928) for general guidance
    - (htpasswd) port the `htpasswd.sh` script to Rust, e.g. using the `htpasswd-verify` crate, an implementation of the `apr1` digest and a `.htpasswd` formatter

#### Environment

Use a custom implementation of an `Env` trait for dynamically setting the runtime name and thus, the automatic choosing of the configuration file during startup.

An example can be found [here](https://github.com/golemfactory/ya-runtime-sdk/blob/mf/dynamic-rt-name/examples/environment/src/main.rs).

#### Command line arguments

Command line arguments should accept a runtime name parameter.

An example can be found [here](https://github.com/golemfactory/ya-runtime-sdk/blob/mf/dynamic-rt-name/examples/environment/src/main.rs).

#### Configuration

The configuration `struct` / `enum` should be de-serializable from all variants of configuration files (i.e., all service types) and contain the following information:

- service binary location
- nginx access log location
- nginx `.htpasswd` file location
- HTTP URIs reserved for the service (regex?)

#### Background jobs

1. Nginx log parser
   
   Monitors the nginx access log file and counts the number of requests made by the current user.

2. Daemon counter updater
   
   Periodically updates the custom counter value (total requests made by the user), extracted from the nginx access log file.
   An example of a custom counter can be found [here](https://github.com/golemfactory/ya-test-runtime-counters/blob/main/src/main.rs).

#### `Runtime` trait implementation

1. `deploy`

- **in background**, start an instance of `erigolem` / `lighthouse` (if not running)
  and wait until the application is ready to accept commands.

2. `start`

- none

3. `run`

    - `credentials <username> <password>`

      Sets the credentials that will be used in the current activity. If a username exists,
      returns an error (with a proper message outputted to `stderr`); the runtime is terminated.

    - `counter <name> <username> <password>` (optional)

      Reads the specific counter value for a given user. The foreseen counter
      names will be set to the requested URIs (locations) configured in nginx.

4. `transfer`

    - none

5. `offer-template`

- if the server supports HTTPS, include a `https` runtime capability in an offer
- (optional) in case of self-signed certificates, add a property containing
  the certificate (name TBD)

6. `test`

- executes the managed service binary and tries to parse the standard output of a sample command, e.g.`<binary> --version`
- (optional) performs (idempotent) requests to REST API endpoints of supported services
- (optional) performs a public IP check

### Deployment

Each service should be assigned its own runtime name and use the common `ya-runtime-basic-auth` binary, e.g.:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "ya-runtime-erigon",
    "version": "0.1.0",
    "supervisor-path": "exe-unit",
    "runtime-path": "ya-runtime-basic-auth/ya-runtime-basic-auth",
    "description": "The Basic-Auth runtime for the Erigon service",
    "extra-args": [
      "--runtime-managed-image",
👉    "--runtime-arg", "ya-runtime-erigon"
    ]
  }
]
```

depending on the installation method, located at:
- `/usr/lib/yagna/plugins/ya-runtime-erigon.json` (manual or `deb` installation)
- `~/.local/lib/yagna/plugins/ya-runtime-erigon.json` (installer script)


## Rationale

Parsing access logs for the purpose of gathering statistics is the least complex of other possible solutions:

- authentication endpoint (extra authentication server)
- authentication lua script
- nginx module
- reverse proxy server

The chosen approach may prove to perform poorly when access is offered to hundreds or thousands of users.

## Backwards Compatibility

TBD

## Test Cases

TBD

## Security Considerations

- the provider needs to properly configure TLS certificates so that the authentication credentials 
  cannot be sniffed (i.e. they won't be sent as plain text)
- self-signed certificates need to be included in the offer in order to prevent Man In The Middle attacks

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
